docs: expand community docs: contributor - simple contribution flow a… (#1730)
asyncapi/community: docs/onboarding-guide/contribution-flow.md

---
title: Simple contribution flow for contributors
weight: 130

> ---

Reviewer: this is the correct path

- Check the [general roadmap](https://www.asyncapi.com/roadmap).

### Steps to making a good contribution
- Set up your workflow environment using the [git workflow guide](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md).
- Search for [good first issues](https://github.com/issues?page=1&q=is%3Aopen+org%3Aasyncapi+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22). 
- When you do find one, request to be assigned.
- If you noticed a bug, typo, or improvement, feel free to create an issue.
- **Make a PR only after a maintainer assigned the issue to you** even if you created the issue yourself.
- Follow the [conventional commits guide](conventional-commits) to write a good PR title.
- Follow the [git workflow document](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md) when working on your changes and making a PR.
- After making a PR, patiently wait for reviews.
- Make sure all your PR checks pass (turn green) to speed up the merging process.  
- If your PR hasn’t been reviewed after a week and half, you can gently remind a maintainer on Slack or GitHub. Delays can happen for various reasons, but no one is ignoring you! 🙏🏼 .

> ## Contribution Flow
> This is a summary of the ideal contribution flow.
> 
> ```mermaid
> flowchart TD
>     A[Open an issue - a bug report or a feature request]
>     A --> B[Open a Pull Request - only after issue is approved]
>     B --> C[Your changes will be merged and published on the next release]
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Simple contribution flow for contributors
weight: 130
---

# Contributor - Simple Contribution Flow
This guide explains how to contribute effectively to AsyncAPI. It guides you through the contribution process and provides a checklist to ensure high-quality contributions. 

## Making a Contribution
We welcome your contributions to AsyncAPI, whether you have suggestions, improvements, or new ideas. 

At AsyncAPI, we value **quality over quantity**. This guide will help you make meaningful contributions that benefit the community.

### Before You Start Contributing
- If you are joining AsyncAPI through [Slack](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite) or an event, take your time to explore the [AsyncAPI website](https://www.asyncapi.com/).  
- Read our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).  

> - [Attend meetings](https://www.asyncapi.com/community/events) and engage in discussions in the [Slack channel](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite).

Author: Which channel should I mention? Although, I added the slack link because I noticed it was a common pattern in past onboarding content.

> - [Attend meetings](https://www.asyncapi.com/community/events) and engage in discussions in the [Slack channel](https://asyncapi.com/slack-invite).

Reviewer 2: TBH, I don't know, it was my question to clarify. Because, if I were a new community member, I would like to know what channels to check in the first place.
I'm OK to leave the invite link but from my perspective it looks a bit confusing. @thulieblack what do you think?

- Read the [documentation](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs) to learn more about AsyncAPI.

### Before Making a Contribution
- Read the [onboarding contributor guide](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/community/onboarding-guide).
- If you are contributing to documentation, review the [documentation onboarding checklist](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/community/onboarding-guide/docs-onboarding-checklist). 

> - For other repositories, refer to the [general contribution guidelines](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer: @ezinneanne check this review

> - For other repositories, refer to the [general contribution guidelines](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer 2: This comment is no longer relevant, @ezinneanne updated the previous wordings and this phrase looks ok now.

- Look through existing issues and pull requests to understand the repository better.
- You can also check the [general roadmap](https://www.asyncapi.com/roadmap).

### Steps to making a good contribution
- Once you are ready to contribute, set up your workflow environment using the [git workflow guide](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md).
- Search for [good first issues](https://github.com/issues?page=1&q=is%3Aopen+org%3Aasyncapi+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22). 

> - When you do find one, request to be assigned.

Reviewer: Oh no, don't mention the _'can you assign me_' statement. We are implementing a bot to flag that as spam.

> - When you do find one, request to be assigned.

Reviewer: @bandantonio @ezinneanne any suggestions here

> - When you do find one, request to be assigned.

Author: I'll agree with @bandantonio

> - When you do find one, request to be assigned.

Reviewer: Okay then, over to you @ezinne

- However, if you notice a bug, typo, or improvement, feel free to create an issue.
- Make a PR only when a maintainer has assigned you.
- Even if you created the issue yourself, wait for it to be assigned by a maintainer before you make a PR.

> - Follow the [conventional commits guide](/asyncapi/community/pull/1733) to write a good PR title.

Reviewer 2: Never link to documents that haven't been merged yet. If you have to, add a comment (or any other reminder) to add a link later, once a specific document is merged to master.

```suggestion
- Follow the conventional commits guide to efficiently describe your changes and maintain clear git history.
```

> - Remember to follow the [git workflow document](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md) when making a PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Follow the [git workflow document](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md) when working on your changes and making a PR.
```

- After making a PR, patiently wait for reviews.
- Make sure all your PR checks pass (turn green) to speed up the merging process.  
- If your PR hasn’t been reviewed after a week and half, you can gently remind a maintainer on Slack or GitHub. Delays can happen for various reasons, but no one is ignoring you! 🙏🏼 .

## Contribution Flow
This is a summary of the ideal contribution flow.

```
    ┌───────────────────────┐
    │                       │
    │    Open an issue      │
    │  (a bug report or a   │
    │   feature request)    │
    │                       │
    └───────────────────────┘
               ⇩
    ┌───────────────────────┐
    │                       │
    │  Open a Pull Request  │
    │   (only after issue   │
    │     is approved)      │
    │                       │
    └───────────────────────┘
               ⇩
    ┌───────────────────────┐
    │                       │
    │   Your changes will   │
    │     be merged and     │
    │ published on the next │
    │        release        │
    │                       │
    └───────────────────────┘

> ```

Author: I was thinking a visual representation would be ideal for beginners to understand. Moreover, using a numbered list would mean repetition/redundancy of previous points mentioned above or should I remove it completely?

> ```

Reviewer: We should have the diagram, but try using mermaid.js @ezinneanne because that's the one we use for docs and for consistency. https://mermaid.js.org/

- If you are contributing to the community repository, review the [documentation onboarding checklist](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/community/onboarding-guide/docs-onboarding-checklist). 
- For other repositories, refer to the [general contribution guidelines](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).
- Look through existing issues and pull requests to understand the repository better.
- Check the [general roadmap](https://www.asyncapi.com/roadmap).

### Steps to making a good contribution
1. Set up your workflow environment using the [git workflow guide](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md).
2. Search for [good first issues](https://github.com/issues?page=1&q=is%3Aopen+org%3Aasyncapi+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22). 
3. When you do find one, request to be assigned.
4. If you noticed a bug, typo, or a needed improvement, feel free to create an issue.
5. **Make a PR only after a maintainer assigned the issue to you** even if you created the issue yourself.
6. Follow the [conventional commits guide](conventional-commits) to write a good PR title.

> 7. Follow the [git workflow document](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md) when working on your changes and making a PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Follow the [git workflow document](conventional-commits) when working on your changes and making a PR.
```

Reviewer: It will open once merged so don't worry

Reviewer 2: @thulieblack Hmm, the link to the git workflow document was correct, could you please elaborate on this suggestion?

Reviewer: The link shouldn't take them to the folder in GitHub but to the doc on the website. For example, how we did with the checklist https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/docs/onboarding-guide/docs-onboarding-checklist.md?plain=1

Reviewer 2: Ok, I got it. But this link was referring to the git workflow document that isn't listed on the docs website, that's why it was a direct link to GitHub markdown. Conventional commits is a different document, I believe we will confuse readers with such a substitution.

Reviewer: Then should we bring git workflow under the onboarding docs then? @bandantonio

Author: @thulieblack you may be using wrong link here. It should be git-workflow instead of conventional-commits

5. **Make a PR only after a maintainer assigned the issue to you** even if you created the issue yourself.
6. Follow the [conventional commits guide](conventional-commits) to write a good PR title.
7. Follow the [git workflow document](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/git-workflow.md) when working on your changes and making a PR.
8. After making a PR, patiently wait for reviews.
9. Make sure all your PR checks pass (turn green) to speed up the merging process.  
10. If your PR hasn’t been reviewed after **a week and half**, you can gently remind a maintainer on Slack or GitHub. Delays can happen for various reasons, but no one is ignoring you! 🙏🏼 .

## Important Contribution Rules
To help maintain a welcoming and productive environment, we have outlined a few important contribution rules that all contributors—especially new ones—must follow.

These rules are here to help you succeed and to support the maintainers and community as we all work together. Not following them can lead to consequences, such as being blocked from submitting PRs or being removed from the community.

### ✅ What You Should Always Do

> - **Be patient**. Maintainers are volunteers with jobs, families, and responsibilities. It may take time for your pull request (PR) or issue to be reviewed.

Reviewer 2: Full wording doesn't make sense here and brings inconsistency as you've already used the abbreviation earlier.
 
```suggestion
- **Be patient**. Maintainers are volunteers with their jobs, families, and responsibilities. It may take time for your PR or issue to be reviewed.
```

- **Use the right Slack channels**. If you’re unsure where to post, ask politely or take a moment to check.
- **Keep Slack tidy**. Use threads for conversations, avoid tagging `@maintainers` unless truly necessary, and don’t spam.

> - **Follow our [Slack etiquette](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/slack-etiquette.md)** **and [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Follow our [Slack etiquette](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/slack-etiquette.md)** **and [Code of Conduct](/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)**.
```

- **Respect others**. Treat everyone with kindness and patience. We are all here to learn and grow together.

### ❌ What You Should Never Do

> - Don’t tag maintainers repeatedly or demand attention.
> - Don’t post the same message in multiple places.
> - Don’t expect instant replies.
> - Don’t ignore the onboarding materials and contribution guidelines.

Reviewer 2: I would place the last item first as it is vitally important one. Basically when you ignore onboarding materials, you will fail with the rest of the mentionned items.

```suggestion
- Don't ignore the onboarding materials and contribution guidelines.
- Don't tag maintainers repeatedly or demand attention.
- Don't post the same message in multiple places.
- Don't expect instant replies.
```

### ⚠️ What Happens If You Break the Rules

We’re friendly and welcoming, but we also value focus and respect. If rules are ignored:

- You may be muted or temporarily removed from Slack.
- Repeated behavior could lead to permanent removal from the community.
- PRs or issues may be closed or rejected if the behavior affects maintainers or the community.

> These rules are not meant to scare anyone—they’re here to make sure everyone can enjoy a healthy and respectful space. When in doubt, be thoughtful, ask questions politely, and refer to our onboarding and etiquette docs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These rules are not meant to scare anyone - they’re here to make sure everyone can enjoy a healthy and respectful space. When in doubt, be thoughtful, ask questions politely, and refer to our onboarding and etiquette docs.
```

These rules are here to help you succeed and to support the maintainers and community as we all work together. Not following them can lead to consequences, such as being blocked from submitting PRs or being removed from the community.

### ✅ What You Should Always Do

- **Be patient**. Maintainers are volunteers with their jobs, families, and responsibilities. It may take time for your PR or issue to be reviewed.
- **Use the right Slack channels**. If you’re unsure where to post, ask politely or take a moment to check.
- **Keep Slack tidy**. Use threads for conversations, avoid tagging `@maintainers` unless truly necessary, and don’t spam.
- **Follow our [Slack etiquette](/asyncapi/community/blob/master/slack-etiquette.md)** **and [Code of Conduct](/asyncapi/.github/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)**.
- **Respect others**. Treat everyone with kindness and patience. We are all here to learn and grow together.

### ❌ What You Should Never Do
- Ignore essential onboarding materials and contribution guidelines.
- Tagging maintainers repeatedly or demanding attention.
- Posting the same message in multiple places.

> - Expecting instant replies.

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, this update brought an inconsistency to the list. Thank about the statement: "... you should never **do**" not "you should never be doing", so your items show follow the same pattern: ignore, tag, post, expect. 
For example, check your previous list (lines 46-49) that follows this pattern: be, use, keep, follow.
